---
title: 'Effective Workflow with Zoterro for a grad student'
date: 2020-01-13 9:00:00 -0700
permalink: /posts/2020/01/zoterro/
tags:
  - professional
  - gradschool
---

This is how I use Zotero for an effective workflow. Mendeley and OneNote are also options. Chose Zotero because it is free. Mendeley is another free option. I didn't have a strategy choosing between Zoterro and Mendeley, I just kind of chose one. 

## 1. Install Zoterro and other necessary packages
 - Zotero
 - Chrome add-on
 - Zotfile
 - cloud storage (google drive)
 read UCB library guide as reference

## 2. Adding references
- save PDFs from journal, etc
- drag and drop PDF into Zotero in relevant placee 


## 3. Organize into collections and tags
main ways to organize in Zotero are collections and tags. Think of collections as folders for each topic, except you can save paper using zoterro by including files in multiple folders. I like to organize collections by project. 

Tags can tie projects together

look into that one german guys filing method - implement this in Zotero?

I like to have a 'To read' folder. Google scholar alerts - dump them in here to be read later

## 4. Taking notes
Annotate pdf, zotfile allows you to export these annotations in Zotero
can also do child notes 
- read pdf using adobe reader
- highlight relevant sections, maybe leave a comment on it
- save and exit pdf
- export annotationo
- leave child note with high level takeaways of paper
- notes are searchable? are PDFs?



### References
1. http://guides.lib.berkeley.edu/c.php?g=4472&p=15929 l
  - ibrary guide on installing zoterro and zotfile
2. http://zotfile.com/ 
  - use guide on zotfile
3. https://www.nrel.colostate.edu/set-up-best-reference-manager/
 - just kind of ignoring this guys cloud service ideas, but following zotfile advice